# DNS Infrastructure Lab

```
Copyright © 2021 by Wenliang Du.
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International
License. If you remix, transform, or build upon the material, this copyright notice must be left intact, or
reproduced in a way that is reasonable to the medium in which the work is being re-published.
```
## 1 Overview

DNS (Domain Name System) is the Internet’s phone book; it translates hostnames to IP addresses (and
vice versa). This translation is through DNS resolution, which happens behind the scene. The resolution
process involves many nameservers, including root servers, TLD servers, and final domain servers. These
nameservers form the entire DNS system, which is an essential infrastructure for the Internet.
To help students understand how these nameservers work together to form the infrastructure, we will
create a miniature DNS system inside an Internet Emulator. Even though this system is small, it has all
the essential elements of a real DNS infrastructure. By building such a system, students will have a deeper
understanding of how the DNS actually works. Although this lab is not a security lab, it is the basis for
several SEED labs. This lab covers the following topics:

- The DNS infrastructure
- DNS forward and reverse lookup processes
- Root and TLD servers
- DNS resolver, local DNS server

Readings and videos. Detailed coverage of the DNS protocol can be found in the following:

- Chapter 23 of the SEED Book,Computer & Internet Security: A Hands-on Approach, 3rd Edition, by
    Wenliang Du. See details athttps://www.handsonsecurity.net.
- Chapter 10 of the SEED Book,Internet Security: A Hands-on Approach, 3rd Edition, by Wenliang
    Du. See details athttps://www.handsonsecurity.net.
- Section 7 of the SEED Lecture,Internet Security: A Hands-on Approach, by Wenliang Du. See details
    athttps://www.handsonsecurity.net/video.html.

Lab environment. This lab has been tested on our pre-built Ubuntu 20.04 VM, which can be downloaded
from the SEED website. Since we use containers to set up the lab environment, this lab does not depend
much on the SEED VM. You can do this lab using other VMs, physical machines, or VMs on the cloud.

Overview of the lab tasks. The DNS infrastructure involves many servers. We will build a simplified
DNS infrastructure inside the emulator. This infrastructure includes two root servers, twocomTLD (Top-
Level Domain) servers, oneeduTLD server, and two second-level domain nameservers (See Figure 1). It
should be noted that students need to replacesmith2021with their own last names and the present year.
We need to configure the nameservers for each of the zone depicted in the figure. We will do it from
the bottom up. Namely, we will configure the second-level domain nameservers first (Task 1), then the TLD
server (Task 2), and then the Root server (Task 3). We also need to configure the local DNS server and the
client machine (Tasks 4 and 5), so the client machine can use the DNS infrastructure. Task 6 is to complete
the DNS infrastructure for the reverse lookup.


```
Root
DNS Cache
DNS Cache
com. edu.
```
```
example.com. smith 2021 .edu.
```
```
Local DNS Server
(DNS Resolver)
```
```
User Machine
```
```
Figure 1: The simplified DNS Infrastructure
```
## 2 The Lab Setup and the SEED Internet Emulator

This lab will be performed inside the SEED Internet Emulator (simply called the emulator in this document).
If this is the first time you use the emulator, it is important that you read this section. We recommend
instructors to provide a lab session to help students get familiar with the emulator.

### 2.1 The Internet Emulator

We provide a pre-built emulator in two different forms: Python code and container files. The container
files are generated from the Python code, but students need to install the SEED Emulator source code from
the GitHub to run the Python code. The container files can be directly used without the emulator source
code. Instructors who would like to customize the emulator can modify the Python code, generate their own
container files, and then provide the files to students, replacing the ones included in the lab setup file. See
theREADME.mdfile for instructions.

Download the emulator files. Please download theLabsetup.zipfile from the web page, and unzip
it. The files inside the container folder are the actual emulation files (container files); they are generated by
the Python code. The name of the container folder is calledoutput/for most labs, but if a lab has multiple
emulators, it will use different folder names. The actual names will be given in the lab task.

Start the emulation. We will directly use the files in the container folder. Go to this folder, and run the
docker commands to build and start the containers. We recommend that you run the emulator inside the
provided SEED Ubuntu 20.04 VM, but doing it in a generic Ubuntu 20.04 operating system should not have
any problem, as long as the docker software is installed. Readers can find the docker manual from this link.
If this is the first time you set up a SEED lab environment using containers, it is very important that you
read the user manual.
In the following, we list some of the commonly used commands related to Docker and Compose. Since
we are going to use these commands very frequently, we have created aliases for them in the.bashrcfile
(in our provided SEEDUbuntu 20.04 VM).

$ docker-compose build # Build the container images
$ docker-compose up # Start the containers
$ docker-compose down # Shut don the containers


// Aliases for the Compose commands above
$ dcbuild # Alias for: docker-compose build
$ dcup # Alias for: docker-compose up
$ dcdown # Alias for: docker-compose down

All the containers will be running in the background. To run commands on a container, we often need
to get a shell on that container. We first need to use the"docker ps"command to find out the ID of
the container, and then use"docker exec"to start a shell on that container. We have created aliases for
them in the.bashrcfile.

$ dockps // Alias for: docker ps --format "{{.ID}} {{.Names}}"
$ docksh <id> // Alias for: docker exec -it <id> /bin/bash

// The following example shows how to get a shell inside hostC
$ dockps
b1004832e275 hostA-10.9.0.
0af4ea7a3e2e hostB-10.9.0.
9652715c8e0a hostC-10.9.0.

$ docksh 96
root@9652715c8e0a:/#

// Note: If a docker command requires a container ID, you do not need to
// type the entire ID string. Typing the first few characters will
// be sufficient, as long as they are unique among all the containers.

If you encounter problems when setting up the lab environment, please read the “Common Problems”
section of the manual for potential solutions.

Set the terminal title. We may need to get into several containers using the terminal. We will likely
create several terminal tabs, and switch back and forth among these tabs. We can easily get lost, because it
is difficult to know which tab runs which container. To solve this problem, once we are inside a container,
we can set the terminal title using one of the following commands (it sets the title to"New Title").

# set_title New Title
# st New Title Ÿ **st** is an alias of settitle

### 2.2 The Map of the Emulated Internet

Each computer (hosts or routers) running inside the emulator is a docker container. Users can access these
computers using docker commands, such as getting a shell inside a container. The emulator also comes
with a web application, which visualizes all the hosts, routers, and networks. After the emulator starts,
the map can be accessed from this URL:http://localhost:8080/map.html. See Figure 2. To
zoom in/out, use the mouse middle scroll. Click on any node, the detailed information of that node will be
displayed on the side panel, from where, users can get a console on that node (container).


```
Get a terminal on a
selected node
```
```
Set filter for Click on a node
packet trace
visulization
```
```
Figure 2: The map of the emulated Internet
```
### 2.3 Filtering and Replying

Users can also set filters to visualize network traffic. The syntax of the filter is the same as that intcpdump;
actually, the filter is directly fed into thetcpdumpprogram running on all nodes. When a node sees the
packets that satisfy the filter, it sends an event to the map, which will highlight the node briefly on the map.
Sometimes, a sequence of events happen too fast to see the actual order among them. In this case, we
can use the Replay panel (see Figure 3) to record the events and then replay them at a slower pace. The
speed of replaying can be adjusted by changing the event interval.

```
Set the tcpdump packet filter.
Nodes seeing the specified
packets will report the event to
the map, which will highlight
the node in real time.
```
```
The map will record the
received events, and replay the
highlighting.
```
```
Figure 3: Capturing and replaying events
```

### 2.4 All the Nameservers

In this emulator, the DNS infrastructure is formed by a number of the containers running DNS nameservers.
We have customized their container names, so they can be easily found. All of the containers have the term
DNSin their names, and their IP addresses are also included in the names. The following command can list
all of them (the order is re-arranged for the displaying purpose).

$ dockps | grep DNS
dedc6676421e as150h-DNS-Root-A-10.150.0.
de5dc343224f as160h-DNS-Root-B-10.160.0.
84cf7c7f337d as151h-DNS-COM-A-10.151.0.
20c134dceee4 as161h-DNS-COM-B-10.161.0.
f20fe7ed115f as152h-DNS-EDU-10.152.0.
cfabce676bed as154h-DNS-Example-10.154.0.
5801404d45d2 as162h-DNS-AAAAA-10.162.0.
c357ff76bda6 as153h-Global_DNS-1-10.153.0.
d65e76c44437 as163h-Global_DNS-2-10.163.0.

// Get a shell on a selected container
$ docksh cfab Ÿ **container ID**
root@cfabce676bed / #
root@cfabce676bed / # st Example Ÿ **change the terminal title**

### 2.5 Copy DNS Zone Files

In this lab, we need to modify the DNS zone files (also some of the configuration files) inside several
containers. We can do that inside those containers. The problem is that once the containers are stopped and
removed, those changes will be lost. It is better to copy those files to the hosting machine, make change on
the host, and then copy them back to the container. We can use the"docker cp"command to do that.
Since we need to run this command very often, we wrote the following shell scripts, one for getting a zone
file from container to the host, and the other for copying the zone file back to the container. Both files are
included in the lab setup folder.

Listing 1: Getting the zone file from container:getzone.sh
#!/bin/bash

keyword=$1 # Command-line argument 1: used to identify container
filename=$2 # Command-line argument 2: zone file name on container
filename_to=${keyword}_${filename} ¿
containerID=$(docker ps | grep $keyword | awk ’{print $1}’) ¡
if [[! -f $filename_to ]]; then
docker cp $containerID:/etc/bind/zones/$filename ./$filename_to ¬
else
echo "** File $filename_to already exists; will not overwrite."
fi

In the emulator, zone files are stored inside the/etc/bind/zonesfolder. Each DNS nameservers
have a unique keyword in its container name, for example the nameserver for theexample.comzone
has the keywordExamplein its name. We use this keyword to find the corresponding container’s ID (see
Line¡). We also prepend the keyword to the name of the zone file, so we can easily identify them once they
are copied to the host machine (see Lines¿and¬). The following examples show how we get the zone file


from the two root nameservers and theexample.comnameserver.

$ ./getzone.sh Root-A root ŸNew file: Root-A_root
$ ./getzone.sh Root-B root ŸNew file: Root-B_root
$ ./getzone.sh Example example.com. ŸNew file: Example_example.com

Copying files back to the container is quite similar, except that we need to restart the nameserver after
the zone file is copied (see Line√).

Listing 2: Sending the zone file to container:sendzone.sh
#!/bin/bash

keyword=$1 # Command-line argument 1: used to identify container
filename=$2 # Command-line argument 2: zone file name on container
filename_from=${keyword}_${filename}
containerID=$(docker ps | grep $keyword | awk ’{print $1}’)
if [[ -f $filename_from ]]; then
echo "== Copy zone file to container"
docker cp ./$filename_from $containerID:/etc/bind/zones/$filename

echo "== Restart the nameserver"
docker exec $containerID service named restart √
else
echo "** File $filename_from does not exists."
fi

Here is an example of how to usesendzone.sh. It sends the Root-A’s zone file (Root-Aroot)
back to Root-A’s container, and restart the nameserver.

$ ./sendzone.sh Root-A root
== Copy zone file to container
== Restart the nameserver
* Stopping domain name service... named
waiting for pid 92 to die
...done.
* Starting domain name service... named
...done.

## 3 Task 1: Configure the Domain Nameserver

In this task, we will configure the nameservers for two domains, one isexample.com, and the other is a
customized name based on student’s name.

### 3.1 Task 1.a: Configure the Nameserver for example.com

In this task, we will configure the nameserver for a domain calledexample.com. The nameserver is
hosted on one of the containers inside the emulator. The keywordExampleis included in the container
name, as well as the IP address.

$ dockps | grep Example
46ab89e26738 as154h-DNS-Example-10.154.0.


Step 1. Add the zone entry. To host a server for theexample.comdomain, we need to add a zone
entry to the BIND’s configuration, so it knows what zones it is going to host. In the emulator, the zones
hosted by a nameserver are placed in the/etc/bind/named.conf.zonesfile (multiple zones can be
placed in this file). Here is an example, where thefileentry specifies the actual file containing the zone
information. If we want to host another zone on this nameserver, we can add a corresponding zone entry in
this file.

zone "example.com" {
type master; Ÿ **this is the master server**
allow-update { any; };
file "/etc/bind/zones/example.com."; Ÿ **the actual zone file**
};

zone "example.net" {
...
}

The above entry for theexample.comzone indicates that the current nameserver is the master server
for this domain, and the zone file is specified in thefileentry. In the emulator, the zone files are placed
inside the/etc/bind/zonesfolder. It should be noted that most of the zone files (except the root zone)
have the.at the end of the filename. This is the main file that we need to modify in this lab.

Step 2. Modify the zone file. Add at least four records (typeA) to the zone file to map hostnames to IP
addresses. You can use the asterisk (*) as a wildcard hostname.

$TTL 300 Ÿ **The default time to live: 300 seconds**
$ORIGIN example.com. Ÿ **The start of this zone file in the namespace**
@ SOA ns1.example.com. admin.example.com. **1635647622** 900 900 1800 60

@ NS ns1.example.com.
ns1.example.com. A 10.154.0.

www A 10.154.0.
abc A 10.154.0.

The zone file must specify the Start of Authority (SOA) record, which contains the name of the au-
thoritative master name server for the zone, the email address of someone responsible for management of
the name server, The parameters of the SOA record also specify a list of timing and expiration parameters
(serial number, slave refresh period, slave retry time, slave expiration time, and the maximum time to cache
the record). If we modify the zone file, we should change the serial number (the highlighted number in the
SOA entry), so the change can be synchronized to the slave nameservers.
In the zone file, domain names that end with a full stop character (i.e., the dot), are fully qualified while
those that do not end with a full stop are relative to the current origin. For example, in the above example,
ns1.example.com.is a full name, whilewwwexample refers towww.example.com.

Step 3. Restarting the nameserver. Every time we modify the BIND configuration files, we should to
restart the nameserver, so the changes can take effect. If there are mistakes in the configuration files, the
nameserver will fail to start.

# service named restart


```
* Stopping domain name service... named
waiting for pid 92 to die
```
```
[ OK ]
* Starting domain name service... named
```
Step 4. Testing. Since we have not finished setting up the entire DNS infrastructure, we need to use the
@10.154.0.71option to send our DNS query directly to10.154.0.71, which is the IP address of the
example.comnameserver in our emulator. If everything is done correctly, you can get the IP address
specified in your zone file. Please report your observations.

$ dig @10.154.0.71 [http://www.example.com](http://www.example.com)
...
;; ANSWER SECTION:
xyz.example.com. 300 IN A **1.2.3.**
...

### 3.2 Task 1.b: Configure Nameserver for Another Domain

In this task, we will configure the nameserver for another domain. The name of the domain should use
the following format<NAME><YEAR>.edu, where<NAME>should be replaced with your last name, and
<YEAR>be replaced with the current year. For example, if your last name isSmith, and it is year 2021,
the domain will besmith2021.edu. In the emulator, an empty nameserver has already been created; the
keywordAAAAAis encoded in the container name. Please use this nameserver to host your domain.

$ dockps | grep AAAAA
70f2e8a57a96 as162h-DNS-AAAAA-10.162.0.

## 4 Task 2: Configure the TLD servers

In this task, we will configure the nameservers for two TLD domains: comandedu. We have already
created three nameservers for these two TLD domains.

$ dockps | grep DNS
c3040914667c as151h-DNS-COM-A-10.151.0.72 Ÿ **The master com server**
3fa8fa41afb6 as161h-DNS-COM-B-10.161.0.72 Ÿ **The slave com server**
6c7132feb7d4 as152h-DNS-EDU-10.152.0.71 Ÿ **The edu server**
...

There are two nameservers for thecomzone. One is configured as the master server, and the other
as the slave server. We only need to modify the zone file on the master (COM-A), as the slave server will
automatically synchronize with the master server. See the following zone configuration on these two servers.

// For master (COM-A)
zone "com." { type master; allow-transfer { any; }; ...};

// For slave (COM-B)
zone "com." { type slave; masters { 10.151.0.72; }; ... };


All the nameservers within a TLD domain must register their nameservers with this TLD server; oth-
erwise, nobody can find them. For each domain, such asexample.com, we need to add two records in
thecomserver’s zone file: anNSrecord and anArecord. TheNSrecord specifies the nameserver for the
example.comdomain, while theArecord specifies the IP address of the nameserver.

Lab Task. Please register yourexample.comand<NAME><YEAR>.edunameservers with their cor-
responding TLD servers. Remember to run"service named restart"to restart the nameserver
after the changes. Also remember to change the serial number of the zone file; otherwise, the changes on
the master server will not be synchronized to the slave server. After making the changes, please run the
following commands to test the servers. Report and explain your observations.

# dig @10.151.0.72 [http://www.example.com](http://www.example.com) Ÿ **Query the COM-A server**
# dig @10.161.0.72 [http://www.example.com](http://www.example.com) Ÿ **Query the COM-B server**
# dig @10.152.0.72 [http://www.<NAME><YEAR>.edu](http://www.<NAME><YEAR>.edu) Ÿ **Query the EDU server**

It should be noted, the TLD servers are configured not to conduct the recursive query, so they will only
tell you the nameserver for the domain name in the query; it will not resolve the query for you. See the
following configuration.

// File: named.conf.options
options {
directory "/var/cache/bind";
**recursion no;**
dnssec-validation no;
empty-zones-enable no;
allow-query { any; };
allow-update { any; };
};

## 5 Task 3: Configure the Root servers

In this task, we will configure the nameservers for the root zone. In the real world, there are 13 nameservers
for the root zone, and they are synchronized through the root zone file maintained by IANA. In our emulator,
we have only created two root servers, and their container names contain the keywordRoot. We will
manually synchronize them by putting the identical content in their zone files.

$ dockps | grep Root
9a96092c7c85 as150h-DNS-Root-A-10.150.0.
60f171f92287 as160h-DNS-Root-B-10.160.0.

All TLD nameservers need to register with the root nameserver, so they can be found in the DNS query
process. For every TLD zone that we would like to include in our miniature DNS system, we need to add
at least two records in the zone file, including anNSrecord and anArecord. In this task, students need to
modify both root server’s zone files to support thecomandeduTLDs inside the emulator. The zone file
is located inside the/etc/bind/zonesfolder. After making the changes, restart both nameservers, and
then run the following commands from another container (replace the<root-ip>with the root server’s
IP address; please try both root servers). Report and explain your observations.

$ dig @<root-ip> <ANYNAME>.com Ÿ **choose an arbitrary name**
$ dig @<root-ip> <ANYNAME>.edu


$ dig @<root-ip> com
$ dig @<root-ip> edu

## 6 Task 4: Configure the Local DNS Server

When a computer needs to resolve the IP address from a hostname (or vice versa), it sends a request to its
helper, which is called local DNS server, also called DNS resolver. This DNS resolver will conduct the
entire DNS resolution process, and then send the result back to the computer. Although it is called “local”,
this server does not need to be local. In the past, when a computer is set up, it usually uses the DNS servers
on its own local network, but nowadays, there are many non-local DNS servers that can be used as “local”
DNS servers. For example, the Google Public DNS is a DNS service offered by Google, serving any host
on the Internet.
When we configure the root, TLD, and domain nameservers, we configure them to be non-recursive,
i.e., they will only tell you what they know, and they will not conduct the entire resolution process to get
the final answer for you. When we configure the local DNS server, we turn on the recursive option (see the
following), so it will get the answer for you.

options {
recursion yes;
...
};

If the local DNS server cannot find the answer from its cache, it will go through an iterative process to
get the answer from outside nameservers. The process starts from the root servers. Therefore, the local DNS
server needs to know the IP addresses of the root servers.
In/etc/bind/named.conf.default-zones, which is included in BIRD’s configuration file
/etc/bind/named.conf, there is an entry for the root zone. This entry specifies a hint file for the root
zone, and that is how the local DNS server knows the IP addresses of the root servers.

zone "." {
type hint;
file "/usr/share/dns/root.hints";
};

In the real world, there are 13 nameservers for the root zone, so their IP addresses are provided in the
root.hintsfile. In our emulator, we have only two root servers. Their information is already added to
the hints file.

. NS ns1.
. NS ns2.
ns1. A 10.150.0.
ns2. A 10.160.0.

The task. We have created two DNS resolvers in the emulator. We putGlobalDNSin their container
names. Their IP addresses are also encoded in the names. You can use the following command to find out
these two DNS resolvers.

$ dockps | grep Global_DNS
c357ff76bda6 as153h-Global_DNS-1-10.153.0.


d65e76c44437 as163h-Global_DNS-2-10.163.0.

Please go to theirroot.hintsfile. Inside the file, please change the IP addresses of the root name-
servers to something else (random, e.g., changing 72 to 75 ), and then show how that affects the DNS
resolution process (run the following commands). Please report and explain your observations. Please do
remember to change them back after this task, because the subsequent tasks depend on them.

# dig @10.153.0.53 example.com
# dig @10.163.0.53 example.com

## 7 Task 5. Configure the Client

So far, we need to use@<ip>in ourdigcommand to indicate what DNS server thedigcommand should
talk to. While this is not an issue fordig, it is a problem for other software that depends on DNS. We
need to tell the operating system what local DNS server that it should use. This is achieved by changing
the resolver configuration file (/etc/resolv.conf) of the user machine, so the container’s IP address is
added as the firstnameserverentry in the file, i.e., this server will be used as the primary DNS resolver.
We have already configured all the machines to use10.153.0.53as the primary DNS resolver,
except for the machines in AS-155. Your job is to configure the host machines in AS-155, so they can
use one of the DNS resolvers (or both of them). You can add the following entries (one or both) to the
/etc/resolv.conffile.

nameserver 10.153.0.
nameserver 10.163.0.

Testing the entire DNS Infrastructure. At this point, the DNS infrastructure is completely set up, we
can run thedigwithout using the@<ip>option;digwill use the local DNS server set by the system.
Please run the following commands from a host inside AS-155. If everything is set up correctly, you should
be able to get the answer as expected.

# dig [http://www.example.com](http://www.example.com)
# dig <NAME><YEAR>.edu

Please use the map to show the packet trace. First set the filter to"udp and dst port 53"to
capture the DNS request traffic. Then run the abovedigcommands. If the entire process happens too fast,
you can use the Replay feature of the map: After setting the filter, press the Record button, and then run
the abovedigcommands. Stop the recording, and replay the recorded events. Adjust the time interval
if needed. It is hard to take screenshots of the packet trace, describing the packet trace in your report is
sufficient.

## 8 Task 6: Reverse DNS Lookup

Reverse DNS lookup is the process of finding out the hostname from an IP address. This process is ac-
tually quite similar to the forward lookup. We use an example to illustrate the process. Given an IP ad-
dress, such as128.230.171.184(an IP address belonging tosyr.edu), the DNS resolver constructs
a “fake” name184.171.230.128.in-addr.arpa, and then send queries through an iterative pro-
cess, just like the forward lookup. Namely, it starts from the ROOT server, to thein-addr.arpaserver,


128.in-addr.arpaserver, and eventually reach the230.128.in-addr.arpaserver, which is the
same nameserver as that hosting thesyr.eduzone.
Tasks 1 - 4 only set up the DNS infrastructure for the forward lookup. In this task, we will set up the
infrastructure for the reverse lookup. For the sake of simplicity, We will only support the reverse lookup
for the IP addresses belonging to theexample.comdomain in the emulator (i.e., the IP addresses in the
10.154.0.0/24network). You need to set up the following nameservers:

- Step 1: Configure the root server. The root servers need to host the NS records for thein-addr.arpa
    zone. We need to add the records to the/etc/bind/zones/rootfile on both root servers.
- Step 2: Configure thein-addr.arpaserver. This server should host thein-addr.arpa.zone.
    We can use thecomnameserver to host this zone by adding the zone to the/etc/bind/named.
    conf.zones. A nameserver can simultaneous host multiple zones.
    zone "com." {
       ... already there ...
    };

```
zone "in-addr.arpa." {
type master;
notify yes;
allow-transfer { any; };
allow-update { any; };
file "/etc/bind/zones/in-addr.arpa."; Ÿ the zone file
};
```
```
We need to create the zone filein-addr.arpa. specified in the entry above. We add the NS
record for the154.10.in-addr.arpazone in the zone file. For the sake of simplicity, we di-
rectly provide the NS for the154.10sub-zone, instead of only providing the NS record for the
10.in-addr.arpazone (and then reply on the10.in-addr.arpaserver to provide the infor-
mation for the154.10sub-zone. A skeleton zone file is provided in the following:
$TTL 300
$ORIGIN in-addr.arpa.
```
```
@ SOA ns1.com. admin.com. 1565237345 900 900 1800 60
@ NS ns1.com.
@ NS ns2.com.
ns1.com. A 10.151.0.
ns2.com. A 10.161.0.
```
```
; Please replace ____ with the correct information
154.10.in-addr.arpa. NS ____ Ÿ The nameserver of the domain
____ A ____ Ÿ The IP address of the nameserver
```
- Step 3: Configure the154.10.in-addr.arpaserver: this nameserver can be hosted on the same
    nameserver where theexample.comzone is hosted. We should add a zone entry in its/etc/
    bind/named.conf.zonesfile (similar to Step 2), and then create the corresponding zone file,
    which should contain the reverse lookup records for theexample.comdomain. We give an example
    of the zone file in the following:
    $TTL 300


```
$ORIGIN 154.10.in-addr.arpa.
@ SOA ns1.example.com. admin.example.com. 1635647622 900 900 1800 60
```
```
@ NS ns1.example.com.
ns1.example.com. A 10.154.0.
```
```
71.0 IN PTR ns1.example.com.
72.0 IN PTR http://www.example.com.
73.0 IN PTR abc.example.com.
```
Testing. After making the changes to a nameserver, make sure run the"service named restart"
to restart the nameserver. If everything is set up correctly, we can go to any of the hosts in the emulator, run
the following reverse query commands. Please report and explain your observations. Please use the map to
show the packet trace for one of the commands, and describe the packet trace in your report.

# dig -x 10.154.0.
# dig -x 10.154.0.
# dig -x 10.154.0.

## 9 Submission

You need to submit a detailed lab report, with screenshots, to describe what you have done and what you
have observed. You also need to provide explanation to the observations that are interesting or surprising.
Please also list the important code snippets followed by explanation. Simply attaching code without any
explanation will not receive credits.

## Acknowledgment

This lab was developed with the help of Honghao Zeng and Keyi Li, who contributed to the development of
the DNS module in the SEED Internet Emulator. The SEED project was funded in part by the grants from
the US National Science Foundation and Syracuse University.


